I say Mind Body these are just words
imagine we could have had mind body and
elbows you know that would lead us to a
different conception of people the
problem is
for people who separate mind and body is
how do you get from this fuzzy thing
called a thought to something material
called the body so I said you know I
don't want to pay attention to any of
that it's all uh interesting philosophy
but it's not useful say put the mind and
body back together then wherever you're
putting the mind you're necessarily
putting the body
I'm extremely pleased to announce that
daily wire plus has decided to make the
16-part Exodus seminar fully and freely
available to everyone over the next four
months on YouTube we are therefore truly
Beyond pleased to invite you almost
hospitably to partake in this great
moral banquet
[Music]
hello everyone watching and listening
today I'm speaking with the mother of
mindfulness Dr Ellen Langer
Dr Langer was a colleague of mine when I
worked at Harvard in the early 90s and
so it's a particular pleasure for me to
be talking to her today we discuss her
latest book
the mindful body thinking our way to
Chronic health
we explore how intentional awareness
paired with humility allows for a
healthier mindset and body how the
perception of time impacts the effects
of disease and age the way to view
tragedy and suffering so that we might
conquer them through Faith and Hope and
the immense benefits to be found in
carefully considering to what where and
who you direct your attention
so I was reading
your new book today
the mindful body thinking our way to
Chronic health
and you know we were colleagues back in
the 1990s I suppose we still are
colleagues in some ways that's right and
I was thinking about mindfulness again
uh and I have a proposition for you and
you tell me what you think about this I
was thinking that
mindfulness is something approximating
paying attention to what you're paying
attention to
but I'm open for definitions you don't
know I like that but the way I have
defined it is actively noticing
um you know that if you um people
give people instructions and say pay
attention
um be present and that's sweet but it
really falls on deaf ears because when
people are not there they don't know
they're not there and all of the
research we've done over 40 years says
most of us most of the time are Mindless
so to be mindful you can do one of two
things the the one most
um uh the easiest for people is probably
just to notice new things about the
things you thought you knew and then you
come to see you didn't know them as well
as you thought you did and then your
attention naturally goes to them the
other is to adopt a mindset the only
mindset we should have for uncertainty
people don't realize that everything is
always changing everything looks
different from different perspectives so
we can never know
and um and if you know you don't know
then you naturally stay tuned in if you
were going to if you thought you knew
what I was going to say next why listen
to me so Jordan it's fun when I lecture
I often begin election I ask people so
I'll ask you how much is one plus one
and people are annoyed with me because
they think it's ridiculous and then they
dutifully say too but it's not always
two if you add one Cloud Plus One Cloud
one plus one is one add one pile of
laundry plus one pile of a pile of
laundry one plus one and one watt of
chewing gum to one wad of chewing gum
one plus one is one so in the real world
one plus one probably doesn't equal to
as more often as it does
and the problem is that we're all taught
absolutes we're taught facts that we
think are unchanging and when you get
again when you think you know you don't
pay any attention so that's why I like
the one plus one because that's the the
most basic where people think surely
they have the right answer now I must
tell you so I was at this horse event
many years ago it changed my life this
man came over and asked me if I'd watch
his horse for him because he was going
to go buy his get his horse a hot dog
you know you know I'm Harvard Yale all
the way through nobody knows better
people know as well that horses don't
eat meat they're herbivorous right
he comes back with the hot dog and the
horse ate it and it was at that moment
that everything I thought I knew I
realized could be wrong which for me was
very exciting because I'd opened up a
world of possibility when was that
oh God that was about
um
a long time ago I'd say maybe even 30
years ago you know so I have been in
this state of openness for at least if
not for my lifetime for at least the
last 30 some odd years
so this you ancient art
and you
you um
mentioned actually
that people should pay it pay more
attention to what they take for granted
and one of the things that I've come to
realize I think I can't now but Jordan
and they can pay attention to what they
take for granted because it doesn't
occur to them they're in right right a
robotic state of mind I'm sorry to
interrupt well no no that's fine it's
it's I I had I have written a little bit
about the role of Art in remediating
that because one of the things that
happens as far as I can tell you can see
this for example I think it's
exemplified well by Van Gogh's painting
irises in particular because it's easy
in some ways to take what you've looked
at many times for granted but what an
artist will do and this is really their
function is to put a Twist on the
perception
and then snap you out of that habitual
frame of mind so that you see the object
that you have taken for granted
outside of the strictures of your
preconceptions and the object always
transcends your preconceptions because
there's much more to it than you think
we we have so what seems to happen
neurologically is that we build up these
little modules that specify our
perceptions and then we default to them
but it's possible to stop those modules
and to re-novelize the phenomena and
then to see it again in its glory and
that is one of the things that what
would you say keeps us falling in love
with life yeah I mean I think that's
perfect the only thing is that once
somebody sees it anew
if they think now they know what it is
then they're going to be mindless again
you know with just that breeze uh
interval of being Mindful and it's
interesting and I don't know if you know
I started to paint
um about well after I turned 50. and I'm
you know I'm not one of those kids when
I was younger who knew how to draw draw
but nevertheless I took to the whole
thing it was very exciting and prior to
my painting
um I had just assumed leaves for example
on trees were green
you know except in the fall when they
turn brown but you know then I started
looking at the leaves and there are
hundreds of shades of green and so they
they've um taking to painting opened my
eyes and made me say that again things I
thought I knew I didn't know at all so
whether you're creating the art or
observing the art in both cases it can
have that effect as long and it can be
an important effect as long as people
don't think ah now I know so I on this
theme of paying attention to what you
pay attention to I want to tell you a
bit of a story and get your comments on
it so
for years I was trying to sell tests
that help people buy uh by by aiding
them and specifying better employees and
I talked to hundreds of middle managers
about the tests I developed them
actually when I was working at Harvard
in our in our department there and uh
what I found was that people didn't want
those tests but what they did want to
know was how to deal with people their
employees that they already hired who
weren't doing well and I thought well
there isn't anything you can do with
them because you're just a manager and
you don't have the time or resources to
deal with people's serious problems
but no one really liked that answer so I
went into the literature and I tried to
see if there were any interventions that
were scalable and inexpensive and
harmless that actually produced a
remedial effect and there there was a
couple of sources of literature that
specified exactly that one was derived
one stream was established by people
studying goal setting in the industrial
realm and the other stream was
established by James penabaker at the
University of in in Austin in the
University of Texas at Austin
and
what pennebaker showed was that if you
got people to write about their past
traumas that made them physically
healthier
and people varied his research to show
that if you got people to write about
their future
that that also made them healthier and
the goal-setting literature showed that
if you got people to write about their
future that they became more productive
so we developed this program that was a
vision program essentially called future
authoring and you can do it in 90
minutes it
it asks people to develop a vision for
their life and so that means to pay
attention to what they're paying
attention to to decide what they want if
they were going to optimize their life
to do it consciously to decide what they
didn't want and to aim away from that
and then to do that in seven different
dimensions of their life
if you have students do that this is so
fascinating I said well I hope you find
it fascinating too if you have students
do that for 90 minutes
when they come into college for their
orientation
they are 50 they're 50 percent less
likely to drop out and their grade point
averages go up 35 percent 90 minutes of
I'm yeah
now I think that's great Jordan I'm not
surprised because everything that you
just mentioned you know Penny Baker's
work for instance is an instance of
making people mindful if you are writing
about traumas that you've already
discussed with people it doesn't have
the um ameliorative effect
um and the thing about about coming up
with a scale it's very interesting
because people don't realize that what
we're always doing is trying to solve
today's problems with yesterday's
Solutions
and um so when you're taking a scale
you're assuming everything is staying
still and those people may have if they
did well on those scales possibly do
well at the job as it was defined in the
past but it's going to change so I have
a different approach to all of it which
is
um essentially the same thing that
you're you're suggesting with this
90-minute
um uh interaction for students which I
think is you know is wonderful what
you're doing is waking them up and you
know when you're writing about uh the
past where you have to write about
something you never explored before
obviously you're being mindful because
the idea of being mindful is noticing
new things when you're writing about the
future because you haven't experienced a
future
um again you're being Mindful and so
um you know they should be taught just
to be mindful from this art
either in your way or added to it or in
place of it and just an understanding
that is very unusual especially in
schools for people to be taught to
exploit the power and uncertainty
again all of the schools schools parents
the Army you know industry in general
teaches people absolutes this is the way
you do it this is what it is horses
don't eat meat one and one is two you
know and so on and by teaching people
that everything looks different from
different perspectives everything is
always changing uncertainty is the rule
not the exception and you don't have to
feel bad about not knowing you should
make a universal rather than a personal
attribution for not knowing because
nobody knows and not knowing is good
because then it makes everything
potentially new and exciting
I'm I'm thrilled that you found this in
90 minutes oh it's just stunning well it
it actually shocked me half to death
because
I started thinking about it I had been
using the same program in my classes
because I had people outline a vision
for their future and then I started
thinking about the fact that
we don't do this in the education system
so I was teaching kids who had 15 years
of education already and no one had ever
sat them down once once in their entire
educational history and said why don't
you think about what you really want and
who you could be and how you might lay
that out and so then I did some research
to trying to figure out into trying to
figure out why in the world this was
because it was as if we have a society
that's predicated on literacy and forgot
entirely to teach people to read there's
nothing more important than having
helping people establish Vision so I
looked at the history of the development
of the education system and it turns out
that it was developed as a consequence
of bringing in Prussian militaristic
models of blind obedience in the late
1800s right to produce to produce
mindless workers who would not be
creative and who would not question
authority and so that's actually that
that rule following that mindless rule
following that you're describing is
built right into the system
yeah that's great you know that um I've
been studying mindful learning where
essentially all you do when you're
teaching is make it conditional you know
rather than saying here are three
reasons for the Civil War or whatever
um it would be here are three reasons
that could explain the Civil War from
this perspective or that so you change
things horses don't eat meat too it
seems that most horses don't eat meat
possibly horses don't eat me it could be
that horses don't eat meat you know all
of the words that suggest it's not
always so and then you get an enormous
difference because people don't learn
the lesson and then think now I've got
it and then close their mind to all the
ways um it's changing
uh it's interesting because
if somebody asked me the other day when
I was doing the podcast because I said
we should be mindful all the time and
I'll explain what I mean by that to you
in a moment and and they said you know
um isn't it exhausting and I'll talk
about that but the important thing was
they said you know why is everybody so
mindless doesn't it serve a purpose and
my answer to that and I'm curious about
your reaction to this because I think
you're better read in this regard than I
that I don't have any data but my
armchair reasoning leaves me to believe
that teaching everybody all this
mindlessness instantiates the status quo
you know there's no reason why you and I
should have these lofty positions and so
many others um who would have something
else to bring to the table that's no
less valuable uh don't get a chance to
offer it you know so
um uh and so it will speak to that and
then I'll tell you what I mean by why we
should be mindful all the time
as central banks and countries like
China India and Australia begin
transitioning to a digital currency the
Federal Reserve has been contemplating
the same for the U.S with the digital
currency the government can track every
single purchase you make officials could
even prohibit you from purchasing
certain products or easily freeze or
seize part of or all of your money these
are some of the reasons concerned
Americans reach out to Birch gold they
want to have a physical asset like gold
that's independent of the US dollar you
can protect your IRA or 401K by
diversifying with gold from Birch gold
historically gold has been a safe haven
in times of high uncertainty which is
right now learn if gold is right for you
too text Jordan to 98 9898 and they'll
send you a free info kit on gold with an
A plus rating with the Better Business
Bureau thousands of happy customers and
countless five-star reviews I trust
Birch gold to help you diversify into
gold
if a central bank digital currency
becomes a reality it will be nice to
have some gold to depend on again text
Jordan to 989898
well I think that you can make a case
that
and this is a common case made by say
social critics particularly on the left
is that
anything that biases behavior in favor
of Maintenance of the status quo
obviously benefits people who are highly
positioned in that status quo right now
but there's there's another
psychological reason for that too which
is that if you introduce anomaly into a
conceptual scheme you include you
increase entropy by increasing choice
and increased entropy if if you increase
entropy and that happens involuntarily
you catalyze the stress response now if
you increase entropy voluntarily you
don't catalyze the stress response you
catalyze a challenge response and the
challenge response looks like it's
associated with positive emotion
exploration and play
and so that's another issue where
attitude makes all the difference you
see this in clinical work too because if
people are exposed accidentally to a
stressor and their phobic that tends to
make them more phobic but if they're
introduced voluntarily to a stressor of
the same magnitude then the introduction
of the stressor is Curative
and then to on your final point you said
that it's also easier let's say to
default to mindlessness and the thing is
you know that's true no I I don't think
it well I don't think it's really easier
in fact I think people don't fully
understand what uh what I mean by being
mindful because they think you know uh
when I say should be mindful all the
time people get crazy how could that be
because they confuse mindfulness with
just thinking and thinking has gotten a
bad rap yeah thinking is fun what's
what's not good about uh thinking and
stressful about thinking is worrying
about whether you're going to get the
problem solved whether you're going to
look stupid when you come up with your
answers and so on
um which uh you know which is the stress
that you're talking about and that's
debilitating but all stress is Mindless
you know so my view is that if you're
gonna do it you should be there for it
and that mindfulness it turns out is
energy be getting not consuming and that
you know when you're if you came here to
visit me Jordan since you've never been
at my house here
um everything would be new you'd be
looking around you'd see what books is
she reading oh you know there are all
those Fritos that your
um men who helped set this up left
around you know you would notice and it
wouldn't be hard for you
um you'd go on a trip to Europe you
don't have to practice being mindful
your expectation is it will all be new
and so you are Mindful and mindfulness
is the essence of Engagement it's what
you do when you're having fun
so um you know is there a limit to how
much fun and how happy you can be I
don't think so so we should be mindful
all the time if people say well aren't
there circumstances where it's your
advantage to be mindless my answer is
emphatically no and I say let's say
you're at the park and you took a a
two-year-old with you and this is a
person trying to challenge me and says
now and the two-year-old wanders into
the street wouldn't it be best to
mindlessly just grab the child
um so that the child doesn't hit by the
oncoming car and my response to that is
twofold the first is that if you were
mindful the child wouldn't have ended up
in the street in the first place and
secondly that
um probably in grabbing the child you
want to notice the posture of the driver
to figure out whether they're going to
turn right or left to know if you should
take the child out of Harm's Way going
to the right or left and so on
um that the only time one should be
mindless I believe is when you found the
very best way of doing doing something
and nothing changes and so clearly I
don't think those conditions can be met
so mindlessness feels good I have I have
over 45 years of research showing that
um it's good for your health people it's
good for your relationships people see
you as authentic charismatic and it even
leaves its imprint on the things that we
do and given that it's so easy I can
find no reason why people wouldn't begin
immediately after understanding us today
to become more mindful so a variety of
things there
the first is the the behaviorist the
Neuroscience oriented behaviorists
distinguish two forms of reward there is
satiation reward consummatory reward
technically an incentive reward and
Conservatory reward tends to bring about
quiescence and sleep and so I might say
well you should be mindless when it's
time to go to sleep because it's time to
go to sleep if you're satiated there are
there are times for rest
with regard to optimized engagement that
seems to be an incentive reward
phenomenon that's mediated by dopamine
and it's Associated as you already
pointed out with exploration and play
and I would say that is is it exhausting
I mean it depends on the level of
intensity but it's definitely engaging
and and it's it's also engaging in an
interesting manner because what play
does is engage you in a manner that
expands your realm of adaptive
competence right so you're you're doing
the task but you're simultaneously
getting better at doing the task and
that that's a very that's an optimized
place to stand that's vygotsky's zone of
proximal development because you're
continually expanding your domain of
adaptive competence by playing and the
emotions that are associated with that
are associated with engagement and
meaning and depth right right yeah yeah
yeah you know it's interesting you
mentioned fatigue so um in the mindful
body I have I present some research on
fatigue let me give you
um the simplest of these lists let's
imagine uh we have what do I have to
imagine and I'll report it so we have a
group of people we have them do 100
jumping jacks very simple and tell us
when you get tired so they get tired
around two-thirds of the way through the
activity around 67. so then we have
another group of people they're going to
do 200 Jumping Jacks and we ask them
tell us when you're tired and they also
are tired two-thirds of the way through
which is twice as many jumping jacks as
the former group and we do this across
all you know but ballerinas uh in all
different uh spheres so there's a degree
to which fatigue itself is a mindset and
limits us
um but I think that you know if you go
back to I I you made me think about
something of somebody you get into bed
and you want to go to sleep and you are
suggesting that maybe at that point they
should be mindless I think that what
happens too often is that the stress of
the day uh keeps people awake
you know um and that um if they weren't
stress and stress is Mindless you know
when you're stressed two things are
happening first you believe something
awful is something's going to happen and
second that when it happens it's going
to be awful and prediction is an
illusion so if you said to yourself
simply what are three five reasons why
this thing won't happen you won't fail
the test you won't be fired your spouse
won't leave you whatever it is that's
keeping you awake at night and you give
yourself three to five reasons why it
won't happen well you immediately feel
better maybe it'll happen maybe it won't
rather than it's definitely going to
happen and then turn it around let's
assume it does happen What are three or
five reasons ways that that's actually a
good thing
and if people don't realize that events
themselves don't come pre-packaged there
aren't good things bad things that
whatever happens needs to be interpreted
by us and the more mindful you are the
more available are multiple
interpretations good bad and whatever
and I don't know why I keep using this
as an example maybe help me come up with
a better one but if you and I went out
to lunch and the food was delicious
wonderful the food's delicious if you
and I go out for lunch and the food is
awful wonderful the food is awful
presumably I'll eat less and that'll be
better for my waistline you know that
um when you know and and with this
attitude and I don't know if I'm going
to be able to make this clear but I hope
people will think about it there's a way
I live my life and I fall up I don't
fall down you know my car gets a ding on
it I get it repaired and I fix something
that uh something else about the car so
afterwards it's better than it was
before
um you know so when you realize that
events don't determine how you feel it's
the view you take of the event that
determines how you feel
um then you know it's hard to understand
why we would come up with explanations
that are frightening and stressful and
people say you know everybody has to
experience stress they just take it as a
given and I tell you uh Jordan let there
are things you know I'm 76 years old so
certainly in my life there are things
that have happened that have been big
but um in the normal course of a day a
week a month a year I don't experience
stress and I have this one liner that I
think people will find useful you know
ask yourself when something happens is
it a tragedy or an inconvenience
rarely is it ever a tragedy the dog ate
my homework I missed the bus I burnt the
meal you know whatever it is that causes
us stress and it turns out that almost
everything that we're stressed about
virtually all of it never happens
so you talk take the attitude no worry
take the attitude no worry before it's
time okay you're the reframing that you
talked about with regards to people's um
worry at night that's something that's
very much part and parcel of cognitive
behavioral therapy is that one of the
things that you do is involved in the
beginning right right well you take
people who are locked into say a
depressive or an anxiety-inducing
pattern of of repetitive thought and you
have them open up a wider realm of
possibility and then you have them
practice instantiating that so that
becomes more part of their well part of
their nature let's say you also
mentioned the jumping jack study and uh
it reminded me of studies done by Peter
Hermann showing that if you imagine you
bring people into the lab and you have
them watch a movie and you give them a
bag of popcorn
if you give them a small bag of popcorn
and you ask they'll eat the whole bag of
popcorn and then if you ask them if they
want another they'll say no but if you
give them a bag of popcorn that's five
times that big they will also eat that
yes exactly exactly it's like it's and
it it what what seems to happen is that
we set up a Target and the target is
somewhat arbitrary right so it could be
portion size and then the goal is to hit
the target
and And You And the emotions that are
experienced in relationship to that
Target are Target dependent and so and
this is also it's also part of the trick
of setting optimal goals right is that
you want to set a goal that challenges
you and that pushes you beyond your
limits but you don't want to set a goal
that's absolutely impossible to attain
if you set a high goal the amount of
positive emotion that you experience as
you move towards the goal increases but
if the goal is too high and it's
impossible well then it's you know then
that can be frustrating and and
disappointing
but it's very interesting let me see how
malleable that is
well it's interesting because one of the
ways I Define mindlessness is to be goal
driven
Rule and routine driven you know that
it's fine to have a goal but you have to
realize we're setting that goal at time
one
and oftentimes uh moving towards
something several years in the future
Lots change and there's no reason for us
not to take advantage of the changes and
perhaps change the goal you know when we
form these goals where do they come from
you know somebody said it's important to
be a doctor for example and so you're on
your way to be a doctor but you really
don't want to be a doctor you know
change it
um essentially at the end of the end of
the game
you want to feel good about yourself you
want to feel good about your
relationships and feel perhaps that
you've made some contribution in some
way to somebody or To The World At Large
and you can do that almost
um uh in any occupation and
um I think that you know there are
people who are given goals they I want
to be a billionaire used to be when I
was younger a millionaire that's not
enough I want to be a billionaire but I
think that if we surveyed most of the
billionaires and they were honest you'd
see most of them are not very happy
so if you sit back at square one do you
want to be an unhappy billionaire or a
happy
um bike store owner I think people might
choose differently so as you're gaining
information uh pursuing the goal you
want to in fact be open to possibility I
mean so I say to my class that you know
um let's say that on your way to school
today you run into I I don't know uh
who's famous these days that they might
like
yeah that you are just so cool or
whatever word they use
um please you know let's go have a cup
of coffee
uh but you say no I can't I have
Professor Langer's class meeting now
I
that's ridiculous you know that here's
an opportunity that you're probably not
going to get again something you would
really want to do
um you should deviate from the plan
you know you should be in the and the
state of mind so that whatever you're
doing is in a sense what you would
choose to do now not doing it because
what you decided to do in a for you a
prior life you know years ago it goes
against lots of what people think I mean
I'm sure you're going to say to me after
this well what about delay of
gratification and here I have a lot to
say that is probably going to be met
with
um
um I don't know disagreement rage
outrage who knows I don't think we
should delay gratification
I think that first of all since
everything is changing you know if I
decide I'm not going to do this now I'll
do it next week this good thing because
next week will be better for me on the
world may change and often changes in
such a way two ways one that I may not
have the opportunity to do it in the
future as in the going for the coffee
with Taylor Swift
or a second that my desires very well
may change now so you say well what
about studying and um you know things of
this sort where we have to do the work
so tomorrow we prosper
and it's very simple Jordan you know
that no matter what you're doing there's
a way of doing so that it's fun and
enjoyable almost no matter what if you
put away the stress of failure of not
being able to complete it successfully
and so on then all the little challenges
that present themselves motivate us and
feel good and
um you know so there's I don't know if
you've ever seen it but you should it's
wonderful there's a YouTube called Piano
stairs and so what these people did in
Scandinavia they go
um to uh subway stations all over the
place and in all of his subway stations
you have an escalator and stairs and so
the film is very clear everybody takes
the escalator everybody
random young person who wants to take
the stairs then they laid down piano
keyboards on the stairs so it actually
makes noise so now you go do as you're
going up because it's such fun in a very
short amount of time nobody virtually
takes the escalator everybody is taking
the stairs anything can be made to be
fun and so I tell my students why wait
for somebody to put down the keyboard
you know one can do it I can't say or
else I would make it more compelling for
you
um as they go up the stairs there's a
way to make everything if not fun
interesting and potentially exciting
once we take off that layer of
um uh evaluation apprehension
the Bible is the root of all wisdom
inspiration and spiritual nourishment
the Hallow app empowers you to explore
the Bible's profound teachings and to
effortlessly incorporate them into your
daily life
a great place to start while you deepen
your understanding of the Bible is to
check out father Mike schmitz's Bible in
a year available on the Hallow app for
brief daily readings and Reflections
here you can dive into an extensive
library of Bible reading plans
accompanied by insightful Reflections
and audio guided meditations whether
you're a seasoned Bible reader or just
starting your journey hallow provides a
platform for you to engage with
scripture like never before
studying the Bible's literary Brilliance
has influenced countless writers poets
and artists throughout history by
studying the Bible yourself you'll gain
a deeper appreciation for the power of
Storytelling symbolism and metaphor
enriching your understanding of
literature across different genres the
Hallow app also helps you connect with a
community of like-minded individuals
sharing experiences insights and
encouragement along the path to
spiritual growth download the app for
free at hollow.com Jordan you can set
reminders and track your progress along
the way enrich your education and
nurture your mind and soul today
download the Hallow app at hallow.com
Jordan that's hallow.com Jordan
hello.com Jordan for an exclusive
three-month free trial of all ten
thousand plus prayers and meditations
one of the things you do
lines of questioning to to explore in
relationship to that one of the things
you do as a clinical therapist
is help people find a man the manner in
which they can extract enjoyment from at
least in potential necessary tasks right
to help them recraft the way that
they're looking at the world so for
example one one way of approaching that
is that if if someone lives in a very
messy and disordered environment and
they want to put that into something
approximating order you experiment with
them to find out how much they could
work on that every day
until they find an optimized balance so
that they're compelled and interested in
doing it and it might be that they can
only do it to begin with for two minutes
or three minutes but they can joust with
themselves to find out what's what's
interesting and engaging and it is
certainly the case that you can ask
yourself regardless of the task that
you're engaged in how you could Orient
your attention so that that task would
be as engaging and meaningful as
possible and that's a constantly
worthwhile thing to do now I want to
decorate that with something
so this you might find this interesting
I hope you find it interesting so you
know this this issue of attention has
been an obsession of deep thinkers for
thousands of years I spent a fair bit of
time studying ancient Egyptian theology
so there's a set of stories that derive
out of ancient Egypt that were well
they're extremely influential in fact
some of the symbols we still know so one
of the symbols is the famous eye you
know the Egyptian eye with the curved
eyebrow so here's what the Egyptians
figured out
they figured out there were four deities
so one deity was the king
that was Osiris one day and he was the
king's evil brother that was Seth that
word eventually becomes Satan one deity
was Horus who was a falcon and the other
deity was Isis who was Queen of the
underworld
so
Osiris is habit
and Osiris is represented by the
Egyptians as a great king who's now
anachronistic archaic and somewhat
senile senile and willfully blind
okay now he has an evil Uncle he has an
evil brother and that's set the evil
brother of the king and he's the
proclivity of ordered systems to become
malevolent with time
the antithesis of that
is Horus and Horus is the Open Eye and
the Falcon and he's the Falcon because
Falcons can see better than any other
animals including human beings and so
the Egyptians determined that Horus who
was the god of attention was the force
that kept the evil King at Bay so
destroyed the negative consequences of
habit and revitalized the social order
and they prioritized attention as the
highest God and so did the Mesopotamians
so they had a a god Marduk who was their
Pinnacle God said Jordan they all beat
me to the punch so this is good to know
and the question is why has it taken so
long for cultures around the world to uh
see the wisdom in all of this
you think it's partly because
if you start to become mindful
there's also the possibility that you'll
bring your shortcomings to mind like
imagine that you do start a practice of
attending
you're as you attend you're going to
learn things about yourself that are
interfering with your ability to openly
attend right and and that can be
challenging and and off-putting because
you can see because you're wondering
well if this is so obvious why don't
people notice it why don't people just
automatically do it and I do think that
part of it is that when you start to pay
careful attention you find things that
need to be fixed and that calls you that
okay so well that's one possibility
anyways
well so let me let me speak to that
because something that's very important
to me
um is the idea that behavior makes sense
from the actor's perspective or else he
or she wouldn't do it and so if one were
mindful they'd be aware of why they're
doing what they're doing and it turns
out that every description we have of
people ourselves or others has an
equally potent but oppositely valence
alternative so you want to diminish me
because I'm so gullible which I am from
my perspective I'm trusting you drive me
crazy because you're so inconsistent
from your perspective you're flexible
you can't stand me because I'm so
impulsive uh that's because I value
being spontaneous so it's interesting I
like this as a clinician years ago we
did this study where we gave people
about 200 of these Behavior descriptions
and we said Circle those things about
yourself that you want to change but you
have trouble changing okay so for me it
would be gullible
um impulsive for example now you turn
the sheet of paid page turn the sheet of
paper over and in a mixed up order of
the positive versions of each of these
and now we ask people Circle those
things about yourself you really value
trusting and spontaneous and so as long
as I value being trusting I'm going to
necessarily be gullible as long as I
value being spontaneous people on
occasion are going to see me as
impulsive and when you realize that
behavior makes sense then we don't want
to change ourselves or other people in
in the same way you know that you might
be tired of me because I'm so whatever
and then when you see the positive
version of it you welcome it and our
relationship flourishes and we become
less judgmental because before you were
talking about
um uh what do we do with people in
Industry who um who don't do well at
whatever the task is and
um it occurred to me that everybody
doesn't know something every I met wrote
a little song about this that I uh sang
from my entire but my grandkids
um I'm not going to sing it because I
can't carry it too and although I should
Jordan because that's what it's about I
do a lot very very well so why should I
hesitate so here we go you ready I'm
ready everybody doesn't know something
but everyone knows something else
everyone can't do something but everyone
can do something else so my long-term
goal is to take the horizontal where we
comfortably sit on top and the vertical
rather and make it horizontal where
everybody is valued and so the person
who seems not to be able to do whatever
it is will be able to do it differently
somehow else you know it goes back to
um you have your teaching and you ask
your students how much is one in one and
one person in the class says one and
what we do now is we belittle that
person we teach the these students
around to have no respect for that
person where in my world what we do is
say Johnny Susie whatever how did you
come up with that and then they tell us
I added one Cloud plus one cloud or
however they came up with it
um and that we learn that much more you
know I was lecturing on South Africa
many years ago and I was staying at this
fancy hotel and I note I was down at the
pool resting one afternoon
and I notice that there was this
enormous amount of real estate in the
hotel you know part of the hotel that
nobody was using and the only person who
knew that was the lowly Cabana Boy you
know that of course if we assumed that
he had something really to offer
we could we would think to get that
information from him and then make more
money which seems to be the goal of most
of these uh entrepreneurs or hotel
owners or what have you
um you know so we we're brought up
thinking there's a single way of doing
things there's a single answer to
questions and all of that Fosters our
mindlessness and you know sometimes when
I'm lecturing I'll look in the uh
audience to see if there's some guy who
seems really big and I'll say you know
uh ask him if he'll come to the stage so
let's assume I'm lucky that day and he's
six five well I'm five three almost all
right and so we look ridiculous next to
each other and then I asked him to put
his hand up and his hand is three inches
bigger than mine and then I raise the
question should we do anything
physically the same way should we hold a
tennis rack a baseball bat a golf club
um and the answer is clearly no and that
the more similar you are to the person
who wrote the rules perhaps the the
better it is for you to follow but the
more important part of that is the more
different you are
the more important it is for you to find
your own way of doing it
and you know and that when when when
people are taught conditionally you know
you sort of hold the racket like this or
you could hold the racket like this
they're more likely to come up with
their own way
than somebody who's told this is the way
so I want to sort I want to sort what
appeared to be two competing claims out
in my imagination so
on the one hand as far as I can tell
you're making the case that all things
considered
um an attitude towards the world that's
more attentive and mindful is better so
that's a definite um okay okay yes but
now but you you added to that a
different conception which was that
every
um negative trait let's say has a
positive element which by the way is
something that that seems to me to be an
appropriate statement but there's a
there's somewhat of a contradiction
there as far as I can tell because on
the one hand you're you're flattening
out the moral hierarchy and saying well
there's a multitude of ways of looking
at things and just because you think
something is bad it isn't necessarily
bad it could be good in another way but
at the same time there is a sort of
ultimate exactly yeah yeah so so how do
you reconcile those that's right I don't
I don't I think that
um you know that in today's world we all
aspire to certain things and given the
values that are currently operative uh
to to meet those values to live the kind
of life that most people seem to want
which is not answering the question
about whether they'd be better off
living a very different kind of Life uh
mindfulness sets the stage for it and
there you know that if it's a
contradiction so be it you know that I
think that
um we can live with contradictions until
we accumulate enough wisdom to resolve
them but at this point yes that's
exactly what I'm saying nothing is uh
good or bad except it's better to be
mindful
um so but you know I think one of the
things that I'd I'd like to talk about
if you're willing is some of the health
work and the mindful body because here
one of the values that we seem to have
um is to be healthy to live a long happy
um healthy life and one could argue that
also that if one is going to live
multiple lives which some people believe
in a reincarnation and whatever maybe
that goal is misplaced but if we take
that goal as real a great deal of the
information we've been given is simply
wrong and I go back to the the horse
that ate the hot dog and what people
need to realize is that that studies
research can only give us probabilities
do you do a studying and the study shows
you that if you were to do it again the
exact same way which we could never do
we're likely to get the same findings
these probabilities are then taught to
us as absolutes Horses don't eat meat
one and one is two and so on now when
you're given a diagnosis and you're told
um
research shows that you have six months
to live or whatever it is I mean that's
insane you know nobody can know that and
when you realize that everything we're
taught or maybe is it allows us to go
forward and find new ways of doing
things new ways of meeting our needs
um and so on so I talk a lot in the
mindful body about Mind Body unity and
tell me what you think of this I say
Mind Body these are just words imagine
we could have had mind body and elbows
you know that would lead us to a
different conception of people and right
now people think
um you know that mind and body being
separate and they know well they're sort
of connected they don't know how
um that the problem is
for people who separate mind and body is
how do you get from this fuzzy thing
called a thought to something material
called the body so I said you know I
don't want to pay attention to any of
that it's all uh interesting philosophy
but it's not useful say put the mind and
body back together then wherever you're
putting the mind you're necessarily
putting the body and we've done so many
studies on this uh the first one you you
might know about because I reported it
earlier on in work is the
counterclockwise study do you know this
Jordan we retrofitted a retreat to 20
years earlier and had old men live there
as if they were their younger selves so
they're speaking about the past in the
present tense
um everything is designed to make them
think that now was 20 years earlier
as a result of this without medical
intervention in a period of time as
short as a week I think it was only five
days actually their Vision improved the
hearing improved their memory improved
their strength improve and they look
significantly younger
just by putting the mind in a different
place so you want me to tell you about a
couple of the newer ones please do
please do and then all then I'll respond
okay so um I'll go in some chronological
order the next one we did uh was a study
with chamber maids and we asked the
chamber Mains how much exercise do you
get they thought exercise is what you do
after work because that's what Surgeon
General leaves people to believe and
they're just too tired so they don't
think they get any exercise so all we
did was take half of them and teach them
that their work was exercise you know
making the bed is like working on this
machine at the gym and so on so I think
we have two groups one who sees they
work as exercise the other who doesn't
realize they work as exercise
just changing that mindset
eating the same working in the same way
they're not working harder they're not
eating less they're not eating more just
changing their mind so now their work is
exercise they lost weight there was a
change in race um ways to hip ratio body
mass index and their blood pressure came
down
okay so now let's go fast forward let me
just give you one of the new the newest
studies so we inflicted wounds well you
know that it would be wonderful if I
could do some something dramatic and
really hurt people I have no desire to
do that and even if I did luckily the
review board is not going to let me so
we inflict a minor wound now we have
people sitting uh it's a little more
complicated than I'm saying but just so
it becomes clear they're sitting in
front of a clock
for a third of the people the clock is
going twice as fast as real time
going half as fast as real time for a
third of the people the clock is real
time and the question is how long does
it take the wound to heal well it turns
out the wound heals based on clock time
perceived time
and we have studies with diabetics you
know the same thing we find that insulin
increases or decreases based on
perceived time rather than real time we
have people in a sleep lab they wake up
they think they got two hours more sleep
than they got two hours fewer or the
amount that they got biological and
cognitive functioning seems to follow
perceived slave and all of this this
might be a fun story for you you know
somebody had asked me where did this
come from I mean how did I get into this
and
um I was married when I was very young
and I went to Paris on my honeymoon and
it was very important that I was very
sophisticated because now I was a
married woman even though I was a baby
and I ordered mixed grill on this
restaurant we were eating in and on the
plate was pancreas
and I said to my then husband which one
is the pancreas this is that one okay so
now
I don't know if I can do it but I feel
like now I'm so sophisticated I have to
be able to eat the pancreas I eat
everything on the plate with gusto now
the Moment of Truth can I eat it well I
start eating it and I'm literally
getting sick I I can't swallow it my
stuff okay and my then husband starts
laughing and I say what's so funny he
said that's chicken you ate the pancreas
20 minutes ago
yeah
it's going on here you know
um it's like you're walking down the
street and a leaf blows in your face and
you get all startled
um Until you realize it's just a leaf
you know that um our thoughts have
enormous control uh over our health and
we need to pay more more attention to
that so you know my mother uh had breast
cancer The Last Story my mother had
breast cancer that had metastasized to
have pancreas
and that's the end game right pancreatic
cancer and then magically it was just
gone
and the medical world couldn't explain
it then and they still can't explain it
now and this mind-body Unity idea does
explain it and I think spontaneous
remissions are much greater in frequency
than people realize you know you have
people who never get to the medical
world in the first place who have tumors
that they don't know they have or even
you and I
um tumors that are there that you know
are magically gone you know we've all
heard stories of people who are told
they only have a year to live and
they're telling us a story 10 15 years
later
you know um and when we believe again
that we can beat whatever this thing is
we organize ourselves differently and
even in a very mundane way you know if I
think that I'm going to live like I
start living and I start doing things
um the you know the neurons are firing
where if I believe my demise is only
moments away I shut down you know and um
help in some sense uh the end of my life
according to a recent study of hundreds
of post-abortive women sixty percent of
women reported that they would have
preferred to give birth if they had
received more support from others or had
more Financial Security and that's where
preborn steps in pre-born is there for
women in their Darkest Hour deciding
between the life and death of their
Precious Child the reality is that women
are being pressured to make this fatal
decision and are being told that their
babies are just a Clum of cells pre-born
welcomes women with love and introduces
them to the beautiful life growing
inside of them which doubles their
baby's chances at life when you support
pre-born you not only support women you
Empower them your donation of 28 will
help a woman receive a free ultrasound
your love can save a life dial pound 250
and say the key word baby or visit
preborn.com Jordan all gifts are tax
deductible you will never regret saving
a child's life that's pound 250 baby or
visit preborn.com Jordan
[Music]
okay so I've I've got a variety of
comments about what you just said my
wife was diagnosed with cancer
first of all in principle a trivial form
and then that was a misdiagnosis and
then she was diagnosed with the cancer
that only 200 people in the world have
been reported to have that killed every
single one of them in 10 months
and she told me about six months into
the treatment
that she would be better on our wedding
anniversary which was August 19th this
was three months ahead
she got better on our wedding
anniversary
and it's been five years yes it's so so
so
I'm telling you that so you're a
Believer well I'm telling you that
because I've seen strange things happen
now I've also seen in my clients for
example you see this with people who are
retiring and retiring is generally a
very stupid plan for people because last
thing yeah well they have a they have a
very narrowed image of what retirement
means so they imagine themselves you
know surfing slip sipping Margaritas on
a beach in the Caribbean which is a real
good plan for the first night but a
really long really bad well right you
just turn into like a fat sunburned
alcoholic in no time flat and like I've
seen people around 55
start to decide that they're old you
know they've sort of decided that
they've had the adventure of their life
and that they're done and that makes
that does facilitate their aging very
rapidly now but by the same token this
is and this is where all this is going
you know I understand that the structure
of reality is malleable in relationship
to interpretation and to a degree that
is unspecifiable right however I'm
curious about your notion of where the
limits to that are I mean you took these
elderly people and you put them in a
situation where they were acting out the
proposition they were 20 years younger
and they were getting all sorts of
feedback from their environment that
that was valid but the the painful truth
of the matter does seem to be that we
all age and that we all die and so you
know there are there are intrinsic
limits too so so tell me how you what
you make of that yeah yeah I don't know
what the limit is I think that it's to
our
um uh Advantage as individuals and as a
culture uh to assume that we can exceed
wherever we are you know I think that
um people what people used to die you
probably know just when when they were
20 years old and then people were dying
mostly at 40 years old and uh this
you'll find this funny do you know who
Willard Scott was I've never never said
this publicly anyway Willard Scott was
the um a weatherman for um a news
program and what Willard Scott would do
is every day every morning he'd say and
happy birthday Rosie from Michigan who
just turned 100. and happy birthday
Peter who I just turned 100. and so the
idea of turning a hundred became to my
mind for many people much more likely
and I think that oddly You know despite
all the work I've done in the uh aging
area all the medical work I think he had
a very significant role in extending our
lifespan you know again if you think
you're going to live
um a long life you organize yourself
differently and it's that organization
those thoughts of how to continue
growing uh no it's very funny the other
day I was helping this person on this
old woman with something and my spouse
said to me you know she's probably a lot
younger than you were which I didn't
even realize so
um I just don't have a sense of I don't
use age as a measure of do it don't do
it and I think that that's that's
healthy I think that you asked about
limits
um interestingly years ago I think it
might have even been when you were at
Harvard
um I was on the division of Aging at the
medical school and Jack Rowe was the
chair of the committee and I called Jack
one day he was my doctor of choice at
the moment and I said Jack how long does
it take for a broken finger to heal
and he says I don't know let's say a
week I said what would you say if I said
I could heal it psychologically in five
days she said okay I said what about
four days
okay what about three days no okay what
about three days and 23 hours
you know where is where is the breaking
point and so that's the way things
progress is in these small steps
um
um but if you follow that logic you know
if you know that if you can do it in
three days and 23 hours so why not three
days and 22 hours and why not you know
and then you slowly get yourself to the
point where you can do it in three days
and if you do it in three days why not
two days and 23 and a half hours and so
on and I don't know what the limit is I
just think we're so far from what these
limits to what we can do in in any parts
of our Lives not just our health
um that we we can far exceed whatever
goals we set for ourselves I've been
writing about there's there's a notion
that's deeply embedded in in the Genesis
text that human suffering is a
consequence of sin and not built into
the structure of the universe right and
it's a it's a strange Doctrine in many
ways because as I pointed out earlier
the normal course of human events is
that everybody ages and dies and so the
notion that suffering and limitation is
built in seems self-evident but then
there's another part of me that thinks
you know we all waste an awful lot of
our own time in futile Pursuits and
self-defeating Pursuits and we impose
limitations on ourselves that are
arbitrary and often lazy and we hurt
ourselves by doing that and then
collectively we deceive each other and
we lie and we don't cooperate well
together and we manipulate and that
interferes with our ability to apprehend
things properly and to structure our
existence properly and you know the
wildly optimistic side of me thinks and
and I do think there is reason for
believing this that if we got our act
together completely insofar as that's
possible and that might partly be by
paying more attention that there aren't
any intrinsic limits that would
necessarily stop us we'd still have to
figure out for example like it's an open
question to me and I'm kind of curious
about your attitude towards this you
know if you
if you could choose how long you would
live
do you have any idea how long you would
choose I mean an indefinite existence
you know of hundreds of thousands of
years that seems yeah it seems to me to
be
like incomprehensibly
dramatic it is and awesome right I mean
it's a long time yeah but but 80 years
seems kind of short so
laughs
I think that um you know it depends what
people should strive for rather than
adding more years to their life they
should be adding more life to their
years and by doing that then
um you'll want to extend you know if
today is really exciting you look
forward to tomorrow if you're miserably
depressed today you're scared about
tomorrow and so that if we were able to
create a world where people were more
mindful where people had more respect
for each other by noticing people's
behavior makes sense or else they
wouldn't do it
um that
um I think that there'd be no reason to
fear you know you you can't imagine what
life is going I can't even imagine what
life is going to be like in 50 years and
I'm I'm a survey which is separate from
whether I'm going to be alive or not
most people would say no but you know
who knows
um you know AI is changing things
the iPhone change things the railroad
change things and all of these so it we
don't know what the big change is going
to be it could be I which planet was it
was it Venus where they just found ice
um making space travel to whatever
wherever it was
um seemingly more possible I don't know
I don't claim to have any uh special
knowledge about what the Deep future
holds so I wouldn't know how to think
about it so you I do know how to think
of you you think that if you
concentrated on maximizing the quality
of your life the issue of how long that
should extend would more or less solve
itself as a consequence of that exact
orientation yeah that seems it seems
reasonable
Ellen can can I can I change the topic
please when we were when we were
um when we were College well no when we
were discussing the possibility of this
podcast one of the things we had talked
about a little bit is the the state of
the university and I do want to I do
want to approach that with you too when
I when I worked with you if you don't
mind
um when I worked with you in the 1990s I
was at Harvard between 92 and 98 and I
really thought I thought it was a great
privilege to be there I really enjoyed
my time in terms of attitude there was
something interesting that happened then
too that that you might find
um worthy of
of contemplation given given your
attitude towards attitude you know that
the junior professors at Harvard were
always destined to leave in 99.9 percent
of the cases you know and when I first
came there I observed that some of the
junior faculty who were at the outer
limits of their of their brief tenure
there were unhappy that they weren't
likely to be considered for permanent
status and that they'd have to move on
and I thought
but I don't want to be in that position
in six years I think I'll go there and
think if the turnover of junior staff
wasn't High I wouldn't have got this job
to begin with
and that I'm pretty damn lucky to go to
Harvard and meet all these people and be
paid for it because most people who go
to Harvard have to pay to go and I got
paid for going so that was a good deal
and that I should be happy with the
outcome regardless of what it was and
then move on to wherever I was going and
that was an attitudinal shift that was
very helpful to me and made the
transition out of there much smoother
than it might have been even though it
was accompanied by a certain amount of
grief anyways when I was there I also
felt that it was a very admirable
institution and and that I was there in
a kind of golden age I thought the
university had prioritized the research
um requirements of the senior faculty as
their number one goal and then they
treated undergraduates exceptionally
well and then they were pretty good to
Junior faculty and graduate students
kind of in that order and the
administrative apparatus was essentially
there to facilitate all of that so it
was it was structured in a lovely way
and I also found that my colleagues
Junior and senior alike were
fundamentally focused on their
intellectual interests and their
research and they did the what was
necessary to keep things moving forward
on the administrative front effectively
but that was not anyone's primary
concern so I was thrilled to be there
um I can't say that the University of
Toronto offered operated with that
degree of
professionalism let's say and and
commitment to Excellence and I also saw
a decline in the quality of the
University Enterprise that was quite
precipitous over about a 20-year period
And so I'm wondering well I'm wondering
your reactions to that and I I'm not
happy with what's happened in the
university community in general
um what's your what's your take on on
the educational front yeah
um well the first thing is that we have
to be aware that anything I say uh may
just be the difference of being you know
30 years old versus as old as I am you
know rather than a change in the
University itself might change rather
than the universities change
um the
idea that
um most people are not going to get
tenure was the rule I was actually I was
I tenured when you were there yes you
were yes I was a no no no and then it's
much later because I was the first
tenured woman in the psychology
department and there were years where
there was you know nobody else right
right that was by far though I yeah but
I remember
um you know I was hot stuff then I'm
allowed to say it because it's the past
right you know that
um and I suffered you know with am I
going to get tenure am I not going to
get 10. I was the hottest thing out
there I shouldn't have had to suffer and
I said to myself you know having gone
through this nobody should have to go
through this
um and it turned out to be positive and
that was wonderful well the university
changed over time so now if you were to
come as a junior person
um you're very likely to get tenure it's
now just like all the other universities
in the world so um so that's a good
thing
um as far as and then the students are
still spectacular
um and my colleagues are doing very
interesting work and the university
supports all of that so those things
haven't changed my feeling is that there
are more rules and regulations than
there were in the past which
um interferes at a time with uh certain
intellectual activities you know if I
wanted to and this has happened over and
over again
um I want to do research the research
I'm doing is not like in the medical
school where you can take one person's
head and put it on another person and
then see if it works you know most of
the things we're asking people to do are
innocuous and it takes forever so we
have the idea then it takes
um a good over a year to get approval to
do it
and then we actually do it and it's just
it's too many steps and um so I find for
whatever reason I don't know what the
reason is actually but that when I was
younger it was easier to get these
things done and not because I'm an older
person now I mean I I think in this way
I'm Wiser you know but
um things have just become more
complicated you know I used to have
um somebody from Europe or or then the
states or
um even somebody in Boston right next
door want to volunteer to be in my lab
well it turns out and that was great
because you know I have so many ideas
and so many things I want to do I need
an army of people to help me do it
it turns out you can't take volunteers
unless they're Harvard students why
can't you take volunteers well because
um unions and whatever has changed so
that in one person's lab somebody found
out that they weren't getting paid they
were volunteering and they were doing
the exact same thing as somebody else
volunteering excuse me as somebody else
so same job One is paid one isn't that
caused a lot of difficulty with the
result that I can't take these people
you know it's things like that that make
it hard
um at any rate uh but it's still a
wonderful place to be
everyone's talking about how chat gbt
and artificial intelligence are going to
change the world big tech companies are
all investing heavily in AI for search
they're also the same big tech companies
that determine your search results only
now they get to cut out a whole new
layer from the information you see why
should they link off to third-party
websites in the search results when they
can let their robot generate the perfect
answer to your question that's why I use
expressvpn to add a layer of protection
between me and big Tech the expressvpn
app hides my unique IP address on all of
my devices this makes it much more
difficult for big Tech to identify who I
am and match my activity back to me it's
so easy to use all I have to do is tap
one button on my phone or computer to
turn it on and that's it expressvpn also
encrypts 100 of my online traffic
keeping me safe from hackers and prying
eyes the best part is one expressvpn
subscription covers up to five devices
at the same time so my whole family can
use it too stop letting big Tech leech
onto your data freely
expressvpn.com Jordan that's
e-x-p-r-e-s-svpn.com Jordan and get
three extra months free
expressvpn.com Jordan
proliferation of bureaucratic
impediments it's well it's hard on the
research side because if you're an
entrepreneurial and creative person
which is what you need to be if you're
going to generate a lot of research
ideas there's a certain quickness of
mind and approach and striking while the
iron is hot that goes along with that
right because you have to follow that
thread of interest and for me
to for me to have to delay a study for a
year means that by the time the study is
possible well not in the least it's like
I what I haven't learned anything in the
intervening year right you know what
kind of useless bastard would I be in
that situation yeah so let me tell you
something so I think that this was
actually I don't remember the year but
it was a long time ago so it might have
even been before things were
bureaucratic you still had people on
these review committees who
um I disagree with vehemently so I want
to do this study I actually talk about
this in the mindful body and this which
we ended up doing but the study is we
want to see the difference between
seeing your cancer as in remission
versus seeing it as cured
all right now
um when the cancer is not there it's you
know this happened a friend of mine who
had very bad case of cancer one day she
comes back from Mass General and she
said I said how are you Eva she said
great my cancer is in remission and at
that moment the light bulb went off why
is it if I had the exact same test
they'd tell me I don't have cancer
and she has cancer and remission and you
know once a person is told that cancer
is in remission the Indica you know
implication it may still be there and
that you're stressed and that stress I
think stress by the way is the major
killer over and above genetics over and
above nutrition
um and so a woman with the silly
five-year rule where there's no data for
it you know the cancer is gone they're
not going to declare her cancer free and
any permanent sense until five years
have passed five years of stress is
awful and what people need to understand
is that if you're in remission and I'll
tell you about the study in a moment but
if you're if you're in remission you're
worried about the cancer if you're cured
you go about living
and
um if cancer comes back in some ways
it'll be the same cancer that's why we
call it cancer but in just as many ways
it's brand new and so there's reason to
see it as something different it never
comes back exactly the same and so when
you have a cold
and then you're the cold is gone you
don't see yourself as in remission
you know and when you get another cold
you don't see it as the same cold as
before it's a brand new cold even though
they both bear similarities which is why
we call them both coals and so each time
you beat a cold you become in some sense
less and less frightened of getting a
cold um I can I can beat this I've
beaten it many times in the past which
is not the case oftentimes uh with
cancer so what we did and here's where
the review board comes into play the
first attempt at this was to ask people
women on a cancer awareness walk
um about whether they see their cancer
as in remission or cured and then we'd
check back a while later six months
later to see how their health has
progressed the review board wouldn't let
us do this
because asking somebody about their
cancer they thought was stressful these
are women on a breast cancer awareness
walk I mean you know and so it required
lots of fighting with them
um the best one years and years ago this
um uh student comes in she's gay and she
believes and I think it's a very
reasonable assumption that if a child is
brought up by two women since mothers
are so important to the upbringing of
kids this child is going to be better
off and and that would have been worth
noting so what she wanted to do was to
go into gay bars and if there were women
in gay bars she wanted to ask them if
they had children
and if they had children she wanted to
ask them to be in the study
and the review board said asking
remember any gay bar asking people uh if
they're gay is insulting
you know well when I heard this I went
crazy how homophobic and whatever now
the point the larger point I guess is
that the people who are on these boards
are ordinary people with ordinary biases
things change over time I couldn't
imagine that that study wouldn't get uh
be allowed to be run immediately now For
Better or Worse
um and um you know so for me these
review boards while I appreciate their
need maybe
um it's always been the bane of my
existence because if they do a
cost-benefit analysis you know should we
be able to run the study well let's see
what the aggravation and potential harm
is going to do to people and what we're
going to for my work they almost never
think it's going to work which is why I
want to do the study in the first place
and so if you don't you know if you're
on the board and you're going to do a
cost-benefit analysis and you don't
believe it's going to work even if I
just ask you to fill out three questions
the costs exceed the benefits so it's
always been hard for me and the you know
I know that the original nursing home
study that we did where we gave people a
plan to take care of encourage them to
make decisions for themselves
um and they live longer this was a very
important study not just from the Mind
Body Unity idea but for medicine in
general
um and um I I don't think they'd let me
do it now
and
um so and I think that's a shame well we
don't exactly understand
the invisible preconditions for the
scientific Enterprise right I mean we
tend to think of science as a robust
Enterprise and in some ways a
self-evident Enterprise and that's
stupid because it's only about 450 years
old and it only emerged once as far as
we know in human history and God only
knows why we ever allowed it I mean a
lot of the great early scientists were
independently wealthy or they had a
patron like an artist and they were left
the hell alone thinking of people like
Darwin I would love that right right if
you know anybody I'm I'm uh available
yeah well you know well it's really how
it's really what scientists should be
looking for I would say instead of
government funding because along with
that Government funding comes exactly
the sort of problems that we're
discussing right now which is well you
know is this going to be of broad public
benefit and the answer is well if I knew
that I wouldn't well I would turn it
into a company in a second right if you
knew for certain that your new discovery
was going to be of broad significant
economic benefit you'd raise money and
you'd have entrepreneurs on board in two
seconds and so that problem would take
care of itself and as you pointed out
too is that the the probability that a
given study will work is inversely
proportionate to its daringness and its
creative nature and so those are exactly
the studies that are going to be
scuttled by anything even approximating
a cost benefit analysis which no one on
an Ethics Committee ever does anyways
because they don't have the technical
technological qualifications for doing
so no I think they do far more harm than
good you know people point out on the
same page well look the the overall
evidence for malfeasance on scientific
side of things in relationship to the
treatment of research participants is
very very sparse there are some
egregious counter examples right
experimentations in in in the
concentration camps in in Germany
um experimentations by the Chinese the
Tuskegee experiment like you can point
to exceptions but all things considered
well most scientists who run a research
lab would just assume for example that
their participants might come back again
or that you know bad word doesn't get
out about exactly what's going on in the
lab and so and most scientists who are
genuine scientists also have a very high
regard for ethical conduct and the truth
because if you don't you never discover
anything right I mean you cannot be a
crooked scientist and discover something
it's it's just not possible so I also
wanted to point out you may know this
already but you know that involuntary
exposure to stress
directly compromises immune function
right because what happens is you
produce cortisol and that heightens
immediate responsivity but it
compromises any long-term adaptation and
so the idea basically is as if a tiger
is chasing you around a tree you can
afford to suppress your immune system
temporarily because you want to devote
all the resources to getting the hell
away from the tiger getting away but if
you are stressed and so it does beg the
question that you were pointing out with
regards say to the I the attitude of
remission versus cure if if you are
stressed even at a low level but that's
chronic like it might be by noting that
you're now at heightened risk and you're
only in remission that stress might
compromise your immune system enough so
that the probability of cancer
recurrence is you know is is as high as
is higher sure it's certainly possible I
mean the physiological
the physiological Pathways for that
being a reality are definitely there I I
wanted to ask you about a dark side of
of re-assessment of illness though look
I was in an elevator once in a hospital
this is when I was doing clinical work
and a patient got on and she was
muttering to herself and she was
muttering she was very distressed she
was completely white ghostly looking
like sweating unbelievably stressed eh
and she let the people in the elevator
know that she was suffering from cancer
and that she was extremely guilty
because she believed that it was an
inadequacy in her attitude that had led
her to contract this disease and to be
unable to deal with it and so one of the
things that that I I have wrestled with
because I do understand the utility of
maintaining let's say a positive
attitude in relationship to illness and
a can-do attitude let's say but by the
same token you know it's it's very hard
on ill people when they have to cope
with the fact that they're ill and
suffering and okay so so yeah what do
you make okay so I gave yeah so I gave
it a design if I'm understanding you
correctly I gave a talk many years ago
to five thousand um women with breast
cancer and at the end I I remember it
was you know the end of the talk this
man said
um that aren't I blaming the victim yeah
I'm telling you that and I said to him
no I'm not blaming the victim the
culture teaches us or you know that we
don't have any control over these
chronic illnesses Now remind me I want
to talk to you about the attention to
variability where we've looked okay we
have a psychological treatment for big
illnesses
um and as long as the culture teaches us
that we have no control how can you
blame anybody for presuming they have no
control and then he said and besides
that you're wrong because my wife fought
the cancer at every turn and she still
died and then I said to him well let me
ask you something if a little kid let's
say a two-year-old is tugging on your
your pants do you see yourself as
fighting that little kid so the language
of fighting the cancer already says it's
this gigantic Beast very strong which
says also that in your own mind you're
not very likely to win to beat it and so
I think that as long as the culture
teaches us and it it's done so less so
now over time because there are so many
people who manage to beat cancer but
when I was young all you knew cancer was
a killer and as long as you believe
cancer was a killer it was going to be
very hard not to succumb to it and I
think that we need to celebrate you know
the people who beat it and and as with
that um living to a hundred example you
know these small numbers but they can
Loom large if uh we have them Vivid and
come to people's minds when my mother
was in the hospital this woman a very
nice woman who she didn't know walked in
because she knew my mother had a
pancreatic cancer and you know obviously
was told she didn't have very long to
live and she said Sylvia my mother's
name they told me 20 years ago I only
have six months to live I went and I
spent all my money I'm still alive but
now I'm poor you know and everybody
knows of examples like this they don't
they should never say anything like that
because they can't know and so as long
as you can't know then first as long as
you're alive you should be living you
know I was going to write a book many
years ago entitled life before death
because sadly for all too many people
um their lives they're sealed in unlived
lives and that's what all my work is
designed to do is to help you know break
that seal
are you looking for an all-in-one
e-commerce platform that can help you
easily set up and grow your business
online look no further than Shopify with
Shopify you can quickly and easily build
your own online store manage your
inventory and accept payments from
customers plus Shopify offers a range of
customizable themes and templates to
choose from so you can create a
professional looking store without any
design experience it even helps
integrate with other popular tools to
help you sell across social media
marketplaces like Tick Tock Facebook and
Instagram with shopify's 24 7 support
and an extensive Business course library
that is available to support you every
step of the way Shopify is the Commerce
platform revolutionizing millions of
businesses worldwide if you're ready to
get serious about selling try Shopify
today sign up for a one dollar per month
trial period at shopify.com jbp go to
shopify.com jbp to take your business to
the next level today that's shopify.com
jbp
well it's a when you're suffering I've
also been looking at the Book of Job you
know and and job is a book that
exemplifies human suffering and one of
the morals in the story Steve Job yeah
yeah exactly no it's the older Jew from
you know from way back when yeah and so
everything possibly bad that could
happen to someone virtually happens to
him and one of the morals that's
embedded in the story is that regardless
of that and also regardless of the
relative unfairness or perceived
unfairness of the Fate
your best and most appropriate attitude
psychologically is to keep Faith and
Hope alive and that story in particular
is very dramatic in that regard because
the reason that job suffers is because
God himself has a bet with Satan that
Satan can torture job enough to make him
lose Faith you know and that's pretty
rough right if you're going to have
forces arrayed against you God and Satan
is a pretty rough battle and what
happens in the story of job is that he
determines to abide by his Faith and
Hope regardless of circumstances and so
maybe you can say to people who are
suffering say from uh terminal cancer
diagnosis that
um
obviously a large degree of compassion
on the part of themselves and
observances in order but that
they will make
they will make the best of a terrible
situation by reorganizing their
attentional structures so that the
maximum amount of Faith and Hope can be
present at every moment and that doesn't
necessarily mean that they'll win so to
speak in the final analysis but it might
mean that the course of the cancer is
going to be less like hell than it could
have been and that's also yeah
no that's terrific
um you know I think I speak to many
people who are given these dread
diagnoses and they're stressed they're
angry and I I simply asked them
um an aggressive way let's assume for a
moment that that's correct is this the
way you want to live the last years last
days or a month and when you realize
that no I mean you know first thing I
want to do is go have a hot fudge sundae
you know
um whatever it is one thinks that they
shouldn't do that you know now why not
do it so yeah I'm in agreement with that
but the the interesting part of that I
think is that when you then make the
decision to make the moment matter and
that's all we have you know when you're
talking about people who are depressed
one of the best things I think as far as
therapy goes is just deal with the
moment
and then the next small and a moment is
easy to deal with and if they are
mindful in the moment they will probably
end up
um beating the cancer they stand a good
chance of beating the cancer let me give
you an example of something Jordan I
don't have to remember in the book I
talk about what we call the borderline
effect now so
um let me explain this let's say you and
I both take an IQ test and you get six
uh you get 70 which means you're normal
and I score 69. which means I'm not
normal that I'm cognitively challenged
sorry nobody in their right mind they
don't need to know anything about
statistics to know there's no meaningful
difference between 69 and 70. I could
have sneezed so I read the question
wrong and so on but my life and your
life will diverge from that moment in
dramatic uh quick and extraordinary ways
and you will be growing and I will be
coming less and less because now I'm
cognitively challenged what we used to
call okay so it starts out
there's no difference but in some sense
that diagnosis causes the difference all
right that's the same thing for all
different diseases so we did some work
with diabetes and cancer just there is
some point on some tests uh where one of
us Falls right above that borderline and
so we're told we have it whatever the it
is one of us right below it and so we
find that those who are give in that
diagnosis Fair terribly the people who
are just like them right before they get
on the diagnosis do fine which suggests
again the control we have over our
health in this case you know not not um
using that control
yeah well and
um that issue of the edge case is very
interesting I mean it's so you can tie a
bunch of things that you just discussed
together so the first is you said you
know you should pay attention to the
moment and there's a gospel injunction
in The Sermon on the Mount to do exactly
that right is to focus to make the
concerns of the day sufficient thereof
essentially and what that means what
that means is that
you want to
you want to occupy a time frame
that optimizes the challenge within that
time frame without it being too
stressful so one of the things you do
for example with people who are
depressed or anxious is you you narrow
the time frame over which they're
apprehending their behavior and if
you're like if you're really suffering
if you're really in pain
you might narrow your time frame to the
next minute like you might not be able
to handle the next day right and so you
want to never bite off more than you can
chew and you can do that partly by
minimizing the time frame you're
Computing over and attending more
particularly to that narrow time frame
and also by narrowing the scope of your
activity which we discussed a little
earlier too if you can't take on a major
task you can't put your family in order
you might be able to say something kind
to the sister you haven't seen for five
years right you can take that
incremental tiny step forward and and
and there's real power in that in that
minimal transformation now you also
talked about attention to variability in
the edge cases I mean how do you
reconcile that with the apparent
necessity for categorization you know at
the edge of every category is an
indeterminate margin right and and you
said well if you're in category a versus
B that can have a massive effect even
though there's no real distinction
now that's and that's an a very
important question you know that am I
saying people should never be given
diagnoses because there has to be you
know these have it and these people
don't have it I'm not saying that what
first I use the borderline studies as a
way of showing if there's no meaningful
difference between two people when they
start and they're given the diagnosis
and then uh the two groups come apart
that means that this group that's given
that diagnosis could do whatever they
were doing that was similar to the other
group and um diminish the negative
consequences so it was a way again of
showing the mind-body unity and we have
control over our health whether we
should or shouldn't be given diagnoses I
don't know
um but I do know that if you or anyone
you love is given a diagnosis you make
them aware that it's a best guess
that these diagnosis
um are based on Research they're based
on probabilities not absolute facts and
when you are told that you may have it
you know that um is very different from
you do have it when you're told it may
run its course in the following way is
very different from being told it will
unfold in this way
you know and I think that's crucial for
us behavioral psychologists aren't very
uh positively inclined to psychiatric
diagnosis and the reason for that is
that they're very pragmatic and so the
the orientation of a behavior
psychologist is well let's differentiate
your problems to the point we can
Envision potential solutions to them and
The Meta construct isn't all that valid
I think there's an exception possibly
and you tell me what you think about
this I found diagnosis useful in
salutary in my clinical practice when it
helped people bind their otherwise
catastrophic anxiety and when it pointed
to a direction forward so someone might
come in and say look man I haven't been
able to get out of my house for the last
five years I'm completely out of my mind
I'm the only person in the world like
this and there's no hope and you say to
them look you're agoraphobic lots of
people have this problem here's the
associated symptoms so you're not the
only one you're not uniquely insane and
we know how to treat it well then
diagnosis has a binding capacity right
it boxes in the issue and and it and it
has a direction yeah now you go to the
doctor and you your stomach is hurting
and you leave and he tells you have
gastroenteritis it just means a stomach
ache and you feel better I I think you
know for sure but I want to ask you
something before I forget about
depression so I've often thought that if
we were able to give people a placebo or
um convince them in whatever way that
their depression will only last another
three weeks
that they would instantly become better
that the most depressing thing about
depression is that you assume that's all
you're going to see going forward well
and you know I think there is evidence
for that
on the treatment front because one of
the things you do in cognitive therapy
with depression is challenge the
Assumption of Eternal permanence so
depressed people tend to think okay I
feel awful right now
I have always felt awful every single
day is unending awfulness and that will
extend indefinitely into the future and
so what you do one of the things you do
is you have people track their moods
over a week hourly and you show them
that there's substantive variability in
their mood even though they were blind
to that and then you also often have
them so so first of all that shows that
it's not permanent and unchanging and
then you often do very detailed history
that helps them understand that they
haven't experienced this before and
almost invariably it has receded like
it's it's almost invariably cyclical it
doesn't feel like that when you're
depressed that's perfect because that's
what we were doing with
um major
um
um diseases teaching people attention to
symptom variability so when you have a
major disease you assume your symptoms
are going to stay the same or get worse
nothing moves in Only One Direction
all right so what we did was we would
call people and we'd ask them how do you
feel now and is it better or worse than
before and why
and three things happen
um the first is wow I thought I felt
this you know whatever the pain is all
the time
now I see there are moments I don't feel
it so you feel a little better second by
asking why the search is Mindful and as
we've said now enough times that that
mindfulness feels good and is good for
your for your health the neurons of
firing and um it's um it's good for you
and third I think that you're more
likely to find a solution if you're
looking for it so we've done this with
big ears with um uh stroke
Parkinson's multiple sclerosis chronic
pain uh even depression and in each case
we have very very positive results and
so you know I when I first proposed this
I was seeing it as
um
um an antidote well
you know you can't give yourself a
placebo and you you have to when you're
given a placebo somebody is fooling you
into thinking that is real medication
and then you take it and it's not the
medication clearly it's a sugar pill so
you are helping yourself so I was trying
to think well how can we have people
give themselves placebos and this was a
way so imagine that you have chronic
pain and you set your uh smartphone to
ring in an hour and then you ask
yourself is it better or worse than
before and why and then at that moment
set it to ring in two hours and 10
minutes you keep doing this over the day
over the week and if you need more time
um and the results have um have been
phenomenal
um and I think all of this work again
supports the idea that I keep coming
back to that uh virtually everything in
the world is mutable we can make it fit
for us better than it does at the moment
and that our own health is largely
um under our own control
so Ellen with with depressed people
people what one of the things you do and
this this is true for psychological
misery in general is you you ask them to
adopt an attitude of open-eyed ignorance
about their own nature so you think you
know who you are but
it's possible that you don't really know
more about yourself than you know about
anybody else like you think you are
privileged access but you're pretty damn
complicated and you're not an open book
and so one of the things we could do is
let's say track the variation in your
well-being across time and then what
we're going to do is we're going to
focus on those times when you feel
better
and we're going to try to figure out
what the hell you were doing during
those times so with depressed people for
example you find that they want to
isolate themselves but if they go see
family and friends they almost
invariably feel better and if they try
that yeah yeah right so well you can see
that the same thing might apply in in a
situation that's characterized by
illness and you could also imagine that
that would have a profound physiological
effect because imagine that you're in a
situation now and you're suffering from
cancer and you're having a relatively
good day
now because you're having a good day
you're not stressed out you have more
positive emotion and hope and there are
situational determinants of that now it
could easily be if you could maximize
the probability that you would stay
there and then look for improvement even
in that that you would tilt your
physiology in a direction of having a
better probability of combating the the
illness itself it could easily be the
case and I think for sure and another
um area that uh lends itself to this
attention to variability is stress there
are some people who think they're
stressed all the time no one is anything
all the time so if we call them uh
periodically and how in a stress are you
now and is it more or less than before
and why and so on then what happens is
Jordan you might find out that you know
you're really stressed when you're
speaking to Ellen Langer but not when
you're not then the solution is simple
don't speak to me you know there's
something else that I want to get your
view on which is
um you know I was very active in the
beginning the creation of say cognitive
behavior therapy and people have asked
me well what's the difference between
let's say a mindful therapy and
cognitive behavior therapy and um so I
want you I'm going to tell you what I
think and then the question to you is is
it a difference that makes a difference
so you go to the therapist with some
problem and you tell them you see the
world in this particular way and the
cognitive behaviorists as well perhaps
it's this other way
okay now because the therapist is an
authority figure what I think people too
often do is then take the therapist
um uh frame of reference as real and and
mindful therapy would be to come up with
many explanations and the more explain
you know it's just like um what I was
saying about stress that if you uh think
of five reasons why it might not happen
the situation changes you know how else
might we understand this when you come
to CG you don't know and when you know
when you know you don't know then you
tune in and that's the bottom line to
um to how to be healthy I guess so
on that this this psychoanalysts
observed first that if you impose a
solution on a client or a patient even
if it's an intelligent solution there's
a high probability that you'll produce
resistance and part of the reason for
that is that you're stealing the
person's Destiny it's like look if you
come to me with a problem and I give you
a solution and you implement it it's not
your Victory it's my victory and so I've
stolen it and if you fail you it's your
failure not mine because you're going to
suffer for it and so people are
naturally inclined to tell an authority
figure to go to hell if they impose a
solution a good cognitive behavioral
therapist won't say here's another way
of looking at it although there may be
situations where that's necessary
because of an emergency say what they
will do instead is say look
could we collaborate on on on imagining
alternative conceptualization under that
situation right and what you really want
you want the person to come up with the
Alternatives and I think that actually
does the rewiring right if if you
deliver the if you deliver the
alternative people don't act it out and
they don't remember it and I think it's
because they haven't undergone the
cognitive reorganization necessary to
actually expand their Horizon you want
the client to lead always that's why
Freud used free association for example
yeah no and I think that's beautiful
what I'm adding to it is that one should
seek multiple potential understandings
yes when we have the client now come up
with a different understanding it
doesn't make that right and it doesn't
make the original one wrong and by by
recognizing that this thing you assure
was an ex could be a y or a z
um leads you to to think think of most
you know when I said to you before when
the horse ate that hot dog it didn't
just change my mind about whether horses
are herbivorous or not it changed
everything for me one event and so if
the person in therapy is dealing with
you know you're sure it's this and then
the therapist helps you to come to could
be this could be that could be the other
um there are many people who can walk
away from that one instance Now with an
entirely New Life okay okay so so you
you do that that's actually been
technically termed collaborative
empiricism so the notion would be the
person's in a fixed mindset
you help them develop a proliferation of
Alternatives and then you say well look
go home for a week and try this attitude
and watch attend be mindful come back
and tell me how it went and we're either
going to find out that it's better or
the same or worse and you'll be able to
tell me if it's the same or worse
we'll try another attitude right exactly
exactly and then and that does two
things as you you pointed out it may
lead to uh a proximal solution to the
proximal problem
but it also teaches the person that
they're the sort of creature that can
generate alternative hypotheses and then
test them and evaluate and that's kind
of a meta learning right that would be
more learning not to be attentive to the
situation but to be attentive period to
make that a habit of mine right yeah
yeah yeah so and a good a good a good
cognitive behavior therapist would do
that they won't impose top-down
Solutions they'll generate a with the
client a multitude of of possible
solutions and then test them do you know
the early study I did with therapists
and labels
this was good we had an interview
between uh it was actually a professor
at Yale when I did this when I was a
graduate student and so we take this
interview and we called the person being
interviewed either a job applicant or a
patient and then we showed them to a
therapists of all different stripes and
almost always when we called him a
patient they saw him as sick potentially
having this and that disorder when we
called him a job applicant they saw him
as well adjusted the same person on the
same tape it was interesting because
excuse me Behavior therapists since they
were more attuned to the specific
behaviors or a little less likely to do
this but I think that
um you know I think a lot of therapy
needs to be reconfigured because
whatever lens you put on is determining
what you're going to see and it doesn't
make sense to go pay therapist top
dollar for telling you how wonderful
you're telling them how wonderful you
are them telling you how wonderful you
are and so the focus on problems in some
instances at least I'm sure itself is a
problem
so you know so the therapist I think has
to always say you know that um uh in
this small realm this is what's going on
not you know because as soon as you walk
into a therapist's office you're
declaring yourself a patient well that's
even therapist now says clients well
Behavior therapists have said clients
forever for exactly that reason and I
don't know there might be an underground
uh that might be an underground
consequence of your early influence on
the field I mean but it's always and I
always referred to my clients in that
manner because I'm not the authority if
I'm the authority in the session
um they're paying to boost my ego right
yeah that's all they have to be the
authority I can listen and we can
exchange ideas and we can investigate
but in the final analysis the decision
to attend and to change and Carl Rogers
knew this too and laid it out
beautifully in his work on humanism
um humanistic psychology the impetus has
to come from the client him or herself
otherwise it doesn't work it has to be
voluntary and and attention focused on
on the same note
um humorously that if you charge five
dollars for the hour versus let's say uh
five thousand dollars for the hour in
the second case the person would get
better faster not because it's costing
so much money but because they value it
so much more that's very interesting in
regard to pricing period you know um we
we've developed a variety of
psychological interventions and tried to
determine how to price them and you
might think that the compassionate thing
to do and the generous thing to do would
be to make them free but it's not well
it's not no it's not at all and it's
partly because the act of paying first
of all is fair exchange and that keeps
the interaction like neutral and morally
untraveled there's no charity in it and
second it is the case that
part of how you determine whether
something is valuable is whether or not
you've had to exchange something I have
to work for it exactly you back you back
so those things are very tricky yeah
well so there's research well we're
coming to the end here so what I should
do is allow you the opportunity if you
have another thing if you have something
else you want to bring up
um I have so much to talk to you about
Jordan because it's such fun talking to
you that
um you know we should end here we can go
on for another three hours so it's your
it's your show you just well
um we are going to talk for everybody
watching and listening many of you
half an hour on the daily wear plus side
and if you found this conversation
interesting and compelling which was the
point then please do join us there
otherwise
um I'll just let everyone know again the
name of Ellen's new book Dr Langer's new
book The mindful body thinking our way
to Chronic health and that when is that
coming out
um it's interesting that it seems to be
already out in Canada I don't know how
that happened
the publication date is September 5th
okay okay so you can pre-order the
mindful body thinking our way to Chronic
Health now and uh well thank you very
much for talking to me today and for
sharing what you know with everybody
who's watching and listening I presume
that people ill and healthy alike will
find what we talked about interesting
and perplexing and thought provoking
that's the idea it's a very complicated
that's the way I found it yeah yeah well
the the relationship between attitude
and brute reality is unbelievably
complex and you know that it's it's it's
a constant source of mystery and need
for investigation and so uh attitude
makes a lot of things there's no doubt
about that and we don't know the limits
to that and your work is certainly been
at the Forefront of making that idea
what scientifically investigatable and
uh and widely publicly known so thank
you very much for that and for talking
to us today for everybody watching and
listening thank you for your time and
attention and to the Daily wire plus
folks and the film crew here in Northern
Ontario the film crew and are you in
Cambridge
now I'm in Dartmouth Mass you're in
Dartmouth to the film crew and Dartmouth
thank you for uh for facilitating this
as well and Ellen will will uh we'll
rejoin each other on the daily wire plus
platform momentarily bye bye everybody
take care now
[Music]
thank you